Down in the valley there were three farms.
The owners of these farms had done well.
They were rich men.
They were also nasty men.
All three of them were about as nasty and mean as any men you could meet.
Their names were Farmer Boggis, Farmer Bunce and Farmer Bean.
Boggis was a chicken farmer.
He kept thousands of chickens.
He was enormously fat.
This was because he ate three boiled chickens smothered with dumplings every day for breakfast, lunch and supper.
Bunce was a duck-and-goose farmer.
He kept thousands of ducks and geese.
He was a kind of potbellied dwarf.
He was so short his chin would have been under water in the shallow end of any swimming-pool in the world.
His food was doughnuts and goose livers.
He mashed the livers into a disgusting paste and then stuffed the paste into the doughnuts.
This diet gave him a tummy-ache and a beastly temper.
Bean was a turkey-and-apple farmer. He kept thousands of turkeys in an orchard full of apple trees.
He never ate any food at all.
Instead, he drank gallons of strong cider which he made from the apples in his orchard.
He was as thin as a pencil and the cleverest of them all.
That is what the children round about used to sing when they saw them.
On a hill, above the valley there was a wood.
In the wood there was a huge tree.
Under the tree there was a hole.
In the hole lived Mr. Fox and Mrs. Fox and their four Small Foxes.
Every evening as soon as it got dark, Mr. Fox would say to Mrs. Fox, "Well, my darling, what shall it be this time? A plump chicken from Boggis? A duck or a goose from Bunce? Or a nice turkey from Bean?"
And when Mrs. Fox had told him what she wanted, Mr. Fox would creep down into the valley in the darkness of the night and help himself.
Boggis and Bunce and Bean knew very well what was going on, and it made them wild with rage.
They were not men who liked to give anything away.
Less still did they like anything to be stolen from them.
So every night each of them would take his shotgun and hide in a dark place somewhere on his own farm, hoping to catch the robber.
