The earliest civilizations developed in areas where it was possible  to practice intensive agriculture,
usually involving use of irrigation systems—for instance, along the rivers of the Tigris and Euphrates in Mesopotamia (modern Iraq), the Nile in Egypt, the Indus in northern India and Pakistan, and the Yangtze and Yellow rivers in China.
Although these civilizations of Eurasia and North Africa seem to have been founded independently of one another, they developed multiple contacts over time, sharing ideas, technology, and even diseases.
All followed a pattern in which stone tools (the Stone Age) were replaced by bronze (the Bronze Age) and then predominantly iron (the Iron Age).
In the Americas, where the Olmec and Maya developed the civilizations of Mesoamerica,
the use of stone tools persisted and most of the epidemic diseases that plagued Eurasia were unknown.
From around 1000 B.C. , Eurasian civilizations found an innovative momentum.
The use of writing evolved from practical record-keeping to the creation of sacred books and classic literary texts that embodied the founding myths and beliefs of different societies,
from the Homeric tales in Greece to the Five Classics of Confucianism in China and the Hindu Vedas in India.
Forms of writing using an alphabet developed in the eastern
For the following 40 years, the Goths’ rule of Italy was relatively untroubled.
However, the accession of Justinian (c.482–565) as Byzantine emperor in 527 changed things.
The effects of the war, together with a plague that killed one-third  of the empire’s inhabitants in 542, made it hard to find troops that could garrison Italy.
The new province provided little tax revenue and it became a major financial drain
The optimism that greeted the capture of Rome was replaced by a profound gloom—a mood confirmed when in 568 the Lombards, another barbarian group, invaded Italy and took most of the Byzantine land in north and central Italy.
Although the Byzantine Empire survived a further nine centuries,
it was never again able to make another serious attempt to restore the Roman Empire in the west.
Instead, it focused on defending  its Greek-speaking core in the east, leaving the Germanic kingdoms in Italy, France, and Spain free to develop unhindered.
From the first millennium B.C. there were sophisticated kingdoms in southern Arabia,
which derived their wealth from the spice trade.
In the early days, the trade routes ran along the northwest coast,
but by the 7th century these had diminished as merchants increasingly used a maritime route up the Red Sea,
leaving many places that had been relatively prosperous in decline.
There were  a few scattered towns, such as Medina (then known as Yathrib) and Mecca,
which were dependent on more local trade in wool and leather, along with a few key imports such as grain and olive oil.
The Arab armies that swept northward in the 630s faced far less resistance than they would have half a century earlier.
Provinces fell easily as weakened garrisons and the doubtful loyalty of citizens undermined resistance.
Although relatively small in number and lightly armed,
the Arab armies were very mobile and did not need to defend fixed positions,
giving them a huge advantage over their opponents.
When they defeated the Byzantines at Yarmuk in 636, the whole edifice of imperial control in Palestine and Syria came crashing down.
In the case of Persia, it took Arab generals just nine years to dismember the Sassanid Empire.
