Dhira was a shoeshine boy.
He lost his father when he was very young and now lived in a jhuggi with his mother and sister.
Dhira was a hard working boy.
After school, he would sit near a cinema hall and polish shoes for a living.
One day it was very hot.
Dhira sat under a tree counting his day's earnings and humming a popular tune when he overheard a passerby.
"A thief has just escaped from the jewellery shop."
Dhira stopped counting.
He quickly put his money back in his pocket and asked the passerby, "When? Where?"
"Just now. He stole a gold necklace and managed to run away. They say he has a beard."
So saying the passerby went on his way.
Dhira was about to go towards the jewellery shop to find out more details when a customer accosted him.
"Boy, polish my shoes nicely. There's no hurry," he said looking at his wristwatch.
The customer was wearing a blue suit and a red tie.
He looked like a rich man.
Dhira sat down immediately to polish his shoes, though his mind was still on the theft.
The man first put his left shoe on the stand.
With his yellow cloth, Dhira dusted the shoe quickly.
Then he opened a tin, took out some polish and spread it on the shoe with his brush.
He worked fast.
He rubbed in the polish and started shining the shoe.
Through the corner of his eye, Dhira saw two policemen approaching.
He was eager to ask them about the theft, but the customer seemed to have lost his temper.
"You, silly chap! You're not doing your job well," he cried glancing quickly at the policeman.
"Polish my shoes, till they shine. There are still five more minutes for the show to be over."
Dhira was badly shaken.
'He must be an influential man. He may even complain about me to the policemen,'
he thought. So he concentrated his attention on polishing the shoe.
As soon as he was done with the left shoe, Dhira said, "The other shoe, sir."
The man put his other foot on the stand.
"Hurry up, fellow, there are only two more minutes for the show to begin."
'Funny!' Dhira said to himself.
'A moment ago he was in no hurry, but now he is in a great hurry.'
Dhira dusted the shoe quickly and applied some polish to it.
As he was about to shine it with a cloth, he found something sticking out of it at the back.
'What can it be?' Dhira wondered.
He bent his head to take a closer look.
'My goodness!'
"That'll do boy. It's time," the man said taking his foot off the stand.
Dhira continued to shine the shoe with the cloth, while the man fumbled in his wallet for change.
The boy quickly tied the ends of the laces of the two shoes and got up without taking the coin the man held out.
As he rushed to the policeman, he could hear the man yelling, "You rogue, I'll get you! But what's happening?"
The man fell flat on his face when he tried to walk.
While he was struggling to get up, Dhira was back with the two policemen.
They caught hold of him.
Yes, he was the jewel thief!
The gold necklace was found in his shoe and his 'beard' in his pocket.
He was taken to the police station.
Of course, Dhira was praised for his presence of mind.
He was also rewarded by the police and by the jeweller.
His school, too, honoured him with a medal for his bravery
